3. Parsing CTCP Messages

A CTCP message is:

CTCP-MESSAGE    = CTCP-MARKER CTCP-TAG *( SP CTCP-TAG ) CTCP-MARKER

where:

CTCP-MARKER    = <US-ASCII character 1 (octal 001)>
CTCP-PERMITTED    = <any octet except NUL, CTCP-MARKER, LF, CR and SP>
CTCP-TAG    = 1*CTCP-PERMITTED

There are two types of CTCP messages: "request" and "reply".  Generally,
a request is generated by the user, and a reply is the automated answer
that a remote client sends back.  For simplicity, a request and its reply
use the same keyword, encoded in different types of IRC messages.  Any
CTCP message encoded in an IRC PRIVMSG is a request.  Any CTCP message
encoded in an IRC NOTICE is a reply.

On non-IRC mediums (such as STREAM CHAT), a reply may be distinguished
from a request by preceding the keyword with a forward slash ("/").  For
example, over a STREAM CHAT connection, a CTCP "PING" request would be
answered with a CTCP "/PING".  This is only valid for non-IRC connections.
This method may be used for DCC CHAT -- however, many clients will not
understand any form of CTCP over DCC CHAT, so a client should be prepared
to expect a failure.  On IRC, the PRIVMSG/NOTICE method of distinguishing
a request from a reply prevails.

The first CTCP-TAG is the keyword that identifies the request or reply.
The other tags are parameters which are specific to that request.  The
keyword is case-sensitive.  All existing keywords are made up entirely
of upper-case letters.  The use of lower-case letters in a CTCP keyword
is reserved.

While many existing clients send CTCP messages in separate IRC messages,
with no other text (the entire message is a CTCP message), this is not
required.  A client must be able to decode CTCP messages embedded within
normal text.  The rule is:  The 1st, 3rd, etc (odd numbers) CTCP-MARKER
within a message starts a CTCP message, and the 2nd, 4th, etc (even
numbers) CTCP-MARKER stops a CTCP message.  A message with an odd number
of CTCP-MARKERs is invalid.

Example:  (^A is used to represent the CTCP-MARKER)
Hello Ja^APING 34^Ane!  How's the we^AVERSION^Aather?

There are two CTCP messages encoded: "PING 34" and "VERSION".  The text
(after extracting the CTCP messages) is "Hello Jane!  How's the weather?"
This is an extreme case of CTCP embedding, but all CTCP-capable clients
are expected to be able to handle it.

IRC traffic containing multiple valid CTCP messages should be processed in a 
left to right order.  Requests generating replies may or may not be combined
into a single message, but must be returned in the same order as the requests
were processed.


3.1 Quoting

There is a set of octets which the IRC protocol is incapable of sending in
a normal PRIVMSG or NOTICE message.  Because of this, IRC is not considered
"8-bit clean".  In order to provide for 8-bit clean CTCP messages, quoting
is introduced to translate some characters on transmission and receipt --
just as an email containing binary data requires MIME, IRC messages
containing binary data require CTCP.  Quoting is also needed for certain
characters (such as the CTCP marker) which are used by CTCP.

Listed below are the characters which require quoting, as well as their
quoted equivalents.

                      ASCII             Quoted
Name                  (Octal)   Quoted  (Octal)
--------------------  -------   ------  -------
NUL  (null)           000       ^P '0'  020 060
STX  (ctcp marker)    001       ^P '1'  020 061
LF   (newline)        012       ^P 'n'  020 156
CR   (newline)        015       ^P 'r'  020 162
SPC  (space)          040       ^P '@'  020 100
DLE  (control-P)      020       ^P ^P   020 020

The original CTCP protocol defined a two-level method of quoting, which
was rarely (if ever) implemented.  Because few clients currently support
this quoting method, and it is generally considered too complex, we have
scrapped the original CTCP quoting.

The CTCP2 protocol introduces quoting at the argument level -- that is,
the characters in an argument to a CTCP message are translated according
to quoting rules before they are combined into a full CTCP message.  Below
is the order used in parsing incoming messages.  This will be involved in
the parsing of CTCP messages embedded within PRIVMSG, NOTICE, and DCC CHAT
traffic.

1. Break the message into tokens using SP.
2. Interpret the first token as the CTCP keyword.
3. Unquote each following token using the quoting table above.  (For
   efficiency reasons, the keyword token does not need to be dequoted,
   since none of the current valid keyword tokens contain characters
   that will need dequoting.)
4. Process the CTCP message according to its keyword.

Likewise, quoting should be applied to all arguments before being
concatenated into a CTCP request.  However, none of the current CTCP
keywords contain characters that need quoting, so an implementation may
skip the quoting step for the keyword token.


3.2 "Flooding" Policy

It is not required that an IRC client respond to more than one CTCP
request per IRC message, but if multiple requests are answered, the
replies must be sent in the same order as the requests arrived.

RFC 1459 indicates that the servers will contain flood control 
mechanisms, which will disconnect clients that send excessive amounts of
text to their server within short periods of time.  Given that this 
method is used by less desirable elements of the IRC community to take 
over channels, gain access to otherwise used nicknames and to disrupt 
the pursuit of enjoyment, each client must take steps to avoid this
outcome.

For this reason, CTCP requests may be ignored by the client, based on 
selected criteria.  Each client must determine, for the benefit of its
users, what means it will provide to ensure that excessive text is not 
sent to the server.  One popular method is to send only N CTCP reply
messages per M seconds (where the ratio M/N varies dramatically, but
should probably be at least 2).  It is also permissible to reject
requests from users who have sent "too many" (for any definition of
"too many") requests, or users whom the client has been instructed to
ignore.

